Document about Gradient Accumulation (#287)
JuliaDiff/ChainRulesCore.jl: docs/src/gradient_accumulation.md

# Gradient Accumulation

Consider some function
$$f(x) = g(x) + h(x)$$.
If we would like the derivative of $f$ with respect to $x$ we must compute it for each part and then sum them, i.e. 
$$\frac{\partial f}{\partial x} = \frac{\partial g}{\partial x} + \frac{\partial h}{\partial x}$$.
In general, we must accumulate (sum) gradients from each sub-part of a program where a variable is used.

Consider for example:
```julia
function sum_first_and_second(X::Array{Float64})

>     a = X[1]
>     b = X[2]
>     y = a + b
>     return y

Reviewer: I have a feeling you want to be as explicit about this as possible, but

```suggestion
    return X[1] + X[2]
```

Author: I want to name `a`, `b` and `y`, so I can talk about them later.

end
```
The AD software must transform that into something which repeatedly sums up the gradient of each part:
`X̄ = ā + b̄`.

This requires that all differential types `D` must implement `+`: `+(::D, ::D)::D`.

We can note that in this particular case `ā` and `b̄` will both be arrays.
This operation (`X̄ = ā + b̄`) will allocate one array to hold `ā`, another one to hold `b̄`, and a third one to hold `ā + b̄`.
This is three allocations.
Allocations are not free, they increase the time the program takes to run by a nontrivial amount, even with a good allocator and a good garbage collector.

### Maybe-mutating accumulation (`add!!`)
We can note that in the above that neither `ā` nor `b̄` are ever used again after accumulating to get `X̄`.
Furthermore, `Array`s are mutable.
That means we could over-write either `ā` or `b̄` and use the result as `X̄`:

> ```julia

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```julia
```

ā .+= b̄
X̄ = ā
```

> This cuts our allocations down to 2, just `ā` and `b̄`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This cuts our allocations down to 2, just `ā` and `b̄`.
```

Reviewer: Git diff sucks at whitespacing changes

However, we have a bit of a problem that not all types are mutable, so this pattern is hard to apply in general.
To deal with that ChainRulesCore provides [`add!!`](@ref).
Per the [BangBang.jl](https://github.com/JuliaFolds/BangBang.jl) convention, this is a maybe mutating addition.

> It may mutate its first argument (it it is mutable), but it will definitely return the correct result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It may mutate its first argument (if it is mutable), but it will definitely return the correct result.
```

We would write using that as `X̄ = add!!(ā, b̄)`: which would in this case give us just 2 allocations.
AD systems can generate `add!!` instead of `+` when accumulating gradient to take advantage of this.

### Inplaceable Thunks (`InplaceableThunks`) avoid allocating values in the first place.
We got down to two allocations from using [`add!!`](@ref), but can we do better?
We can think of having a differential type which acts on a partially accumulated result, to mutate it to contain its current value plus the partial derivative being accumulated.
Rather than having an actual computed value, we can just have a thing that will act on a value to perform the addition.
Let's illustrate it with our example.

`b̄` is the partial for `X[2]` and its value can be computed by:

> ```julia
> b̄ = zeros(size(X))
> b̄[2] = ȳ  # the scalar sensitivity of the `mysum` output
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```julia
b̄ = zeros(size(X))
b̄[2] = ȳ  # the scalar sensitivity of the `mysum` output
```

```

`b̄` is a matrix entirely of zeros, except for at the index `2`, where it is set to the output sensitivity `ȳ`.
`ā` is similar, except with the non-zero at index `1`.

What is the action of `b̄` upon `ā`, to get the same result as `X̄ = add!!(ā, b̄)` (or `X̄ = ā + b̄` for that matter)?
It is:

> ```julia
> function b̄_add!(ā)
>     ā[2] += ȳ
>     return ā
> end
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```julia
function b̄_add!(ā)
    ā[2] += ȳ
    return ā
end
```

```

# Gradient Accumulation

Consider some function

> $$f(x) = g(x) + h(x)$$

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
$$f(x) = g(x) + h(x)$$.
```

> If we would like the derivative of $f$ with respect to $x$ we must compute it for each part and then sum them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If we would like the derivative of $f$ with respect to $x$ we must compute it for each part and then sum them, i.e. 
```

$$\frac{\partial f}{\partial x} = \frac{\partial g}{\partial x} + \frac{\partial h}{\partial x}$$.

> In general we must accumulate (sum) gradients from each sub-part of a program where a variable is used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In general, we must accumulate (sum) gradients from each sub-part of a program where a variable is used.
```

Consider for example:
```julia
function sum_first_and_second(X::Array{Float64})
    a = X[1]
    b = X[2]
    y = a + b
    return y
end
```
The AD software must transform that into something which repeatedly sums up the gradient of each part:
`X̄ = ā + b̄`.

> Because of this it is required that all differential types `D` must implement `+`: `+(::D, ::D)::D`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This requires that all differential types `D` must implement `+`: `+(::D, ::D)::D`.
```

We can note that in this particular case `ā` and `b̄` will both be arrays.

> This operation (`X̄ = ā + b̄`) will allocates 1 array to hold `ā` and another to hold `b̄`, and a third to hold `ā + b̄`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This operation (`X̄ = ā + b̄`) will allocate one array to hold `ā`, another one to hold `b̄`, and a third one to hold `ā + b̄`.
```

> Three allocations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is three allocations.
```

> Allocations are not free, they increase the time the program takes to run by a nontrivial amount.
> Even with a good allocator and a good garbage collector.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Allocations are not free, they increase the time the program takes to run by a nontrivial amount, even with a good allocator and a good garbage collector.
```

### Maybe-mutating accumulation (`add!!`)
We can note that in the above that neither `ā` nor `b̄` are ever used again after accumulating to get `X̄`.

> Further `Array`s are mutable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Furthermore, `Array`s are mutable.
```

That means we could over-write either `ā` or `b̄` and use the result as `X̄`:
```julia
ā .+= b̄
X̄ = ā
```
This cuts our allocations down to 2, just `ā` and `b̄`.

However, we have a bit of a problem that not all types are mutable, so this pattern is hard to apply in general.
To deal with that ChainRulesCore provides [`add!!`](@ref).
Per the [BangBang.jl](https://github.com/JuliaFolds/BangBang.jl) convention, this is a maybe mutating addition.

> It may mutating its first argument (it it is mutable), but it will definitely return the correct result.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It may mutate its first argument (it it is mutable), but it will definitely return the correct result.
```

We would write using that as `X̄ = add!!(ā, b̄)`: which would in this case give us just 2 allocations.
AD systems can generate `add!!` instead of `+` when accumulating gradient to take advantage of this.

### Inplaceable Thunks (`InplaceableThunks`) avoid allocating values in the first place.
We got down to two allocations from using [`add!!`](@ref), but can we do better?

> We can think of having differential type which acts on a partially accumulated result, to mutate it to contain its current value plus the partial derivative being accumulated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can think of having a differential type which acts on a partially accumulated result, to mutate it to contain its current value plus the partial derivative being accumulated.
```

> Rather than having a actual computed value, we can just have a thing that will act on a value to perform the addition.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rather than having an actual computed value, we can just have a thing that will act on a value to perform the addition.
```

> This is a bit of a funny idea, lets illustrate it with our example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's illustrate it with our example.
```

> `b̄` is the partial for `X[2]`.
> It's value can be computed by:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`b̄` is the partial for `X[2]` and its value can be computed by:
```

```julia
b̄ = zeros(size(X))
b̄[2] = ȳ  # the scalar sensitivity of the `mysum` output
```
`b̄` is a matrix entirely of zeros, except for at the index `2`, where it is set to the output sensitivity `ȳ`.
`ā` is similar, except with the non-zero at index `1`.

What is the action of `b̄` upon `ā`, to get the same result as `X̄ = add!!(ā, b̄)` (or `X̄ = ā + b̄` for that matter)?
It is:
```julia
function b̄_add!(ā)
    ā[2] += ȳ
    return ā
end
```
We don't need to worry about all those zeros since `x + 0 == x`.

[`InplaceableThunk`](@ref) is the type we have to represent derivatives as gradient accumulating actions.
We must note that to do this we do need a value form of `ā` for `b̄` to act upon.
For this reason every inplaceable thunk has both a `val` field holding the value representation, and a `add!` field holding the action representation.

> The `val` field use a plain [`Thunk`](@ref) to avoid the computation (and thus allocation) for if it is unused.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `val` field use a plain [`Thunk`](@ref) to avoid the computation (and thus allocation) if it is unused.
```

!!! note "Do we need both representations?"
    Right now every [`InplaceableThunk`](@ref) has two fields that need to be specified.

>     The value form (represented as a the `Thunk`(@ref) typed field), and the action form (represented as the `add!` field).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The value form (represented as a the [`Thunk`](@ref) typed field), and the action form (represented as the `add!` field).
```

>     It is possible in a future version of ChainRulesCore.jl we will work out a clever way to find the zero differential for arbitrary primal values.

Reviewer 3: Possibly a digression from this point on in the note? Maybe we should write this up once it is ready, rather than discuss potential plans here?

Author: good question.
I think we can be forgiven in a sidenote.
And i think understandign that this is a limitation helped understand why we do this.
Rather than thinking that it was intrinsically true that you need both value and action form.

>     Given that we could always just determine the value form from `inplaceable.add!(zero_differential(primal))`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Given that, we could always just determine the value form from `inplaceable.add!(zero_differential(primal))`.
```

This allocation occurs when `unthunk`ing `ā`, which is then mutated to become `X̄`.
This is basically as good as we can get: if we want `X̄` to be an `Array` then at some point we need to allocate that array.

!!! note "Can we do more? Deferred accumulation"
    We could keep going further to drop allocations if we really wanted.
    If we didn't care about `X̄` being an `Array` then we could defer its computation too.
    `X̄ = @thunk add!!(ā, b̄)`.
    This kind of deferral will work fine and you can keep chaining it.
    It does start to burn stack space, and might make the compiler's optimization passes cry.
    But it's valid and should work fine.

### Examples of InplaceableThunks

#### `getindex`

The aforementioned `getindex` is really the poster child for this.
Consider something like:
```julia
function mysum(X::Array{Float64})
    total = 0.0
    for i in eachindex(X)
        total += X[i]
    end
    return total
end
```
If one only has value representation of derivatives one ends up having to allocate a derivative array for every single element of the original array `X`.
That's terrible.

> Where-as with the action representation that `InplaceableThunk`s provide, there is just a single `Array` allocated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the other hand, with the action representation that `InplaceableThunk`s provide, there is just a single `Array` allocated.
```

One can see [the `getindex` rule in ChainRules.jl for the implementation](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/blob/v0.7.49/src/rulesets/Base/indexing.jl).

#### matmul etc (`*`)

> Multiplication of scalars/vectors/matrixes of compatible dimentions can all also have their derivatives represented as a `InplaceableThunk`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Multiplication of scalars/vectors/matrices of compatible dimensions can all also have their derivatives represented as an `InplaceableThunk`.
```

> These tend to pivot around that `add!` action being defined along the lines of:

Reviewer 3: I struggle to understand the rest of the paragraph. What allocations are we avoiding here?

Author: we avoid allocating the matrix `A'*Ȳ`
because we directly perform `mul!(X̄, A', Ȳ, true, true)`
probably some edit here needed to make clear

`X̄ -> mul!(X̄, A', Ȳ, true, true)`.
Where 5-arg `mul!` is the in place [multiply-add operation](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/LinearAlgebra/#LinearAlgebra.mul!).

> `mul!(X̄, A', Ȳ, true, true) = (X̄ .+= A'*Ȳ)`.

Author: ```suggestion
`mul!(X̄, A', Ȳ, true, true)` has the same effect as `(X̄ .+= A'*Ȳ)` but avoids allocating  the matrix  `A'*Ȳ`
```
@mzgubic  does this help? re: https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRulesCore.jl/pull/287/files#r564424459

Reviewer 3: Yes that's great, thanks!
